Is there an, a science, is there an art to cooking meat? Well,
and the different kinds of meats,
is there something you can convert towards <laugh> in, um,
to say ideas, how, how to bring, uh, out the best of,
out of what particular meat, whatever steak we're talking about,
whatever it be we're talking about. Is there something that could be said, the.
Basic approach to cooking any type of meat
beyond the artistry of it is pretty scientific and it's what
type of muscle is it in the animal and what's the surface area to volume ratio.
<laugh> okay. So let's look at those two questions. So the first pieces,
what's the type of muscle in the animal. What's the functionality.
You don't necessarily need to know that, um, to evaluate it,
but you need to understand,
is it a tender muscle that's not used very frequently in the animal or is it a
big load bearing muscle that gets a lot of action, like cheek, right?
Mm-hmm <affirmative> or the shin or the, those pieces.
Mm-hmm <affirmative> the muscles like, uh,
those along the spinal cord that make up rib revises in New York steaks and
things.
Those aren't very exercised they're they're right next to the spinal cord
spinal. Cord's doing most of the work there. They're kind of like, um,
stabilizing muscles around this big functional piece of,
of skeletal structure in the animal.
Mm-hmm <affirmative> other muscles like the ones around the diaphragm with the
flat iron steaks or at stakes and things. Those are,
those are really functional muscles that are doing a ton and moving and the,
if they're moving a lot, what happens? Well, functionally,
they've got lots of muscle sheaths because muscles that move frequently have to
do a lot of like complex contraction. Mm-hmm <affirmative>, that's why,
you know, there's um, in the cheek, for example,
there's tons of visible fiber of like collagenous connective tissue.
Mm-hmm <affirmative> that connective tissue is everything
in how the meat cooks because connective tissue doesn't respond to
high heat with becoming more tender muscles, do, right.
They can get a sea on them, you can cut them and eat them.
The collagenous tissue will GLM up and get really tough.
So you either have to liquefy it with really low, slow heat with moisture,
right. Um,
or you have to barely cook it and that's so that's the major piece.
So that's the question of like,
why wouldn't you just throw brisket on the grill? Mm-hmm <affirmative> okay.
It's not about the fat. You can cut the fat out.
The reason you're not gonna throw brisket on the grill and cook it hot and fast
is too much. Collagenous connective tissue in it.
Those are these giant muscles that have all this collagen and these fibers and
tendons in them effectively.
Mm-hmm <affirmative> so you're never gonna be able to just cook that up hot,
fast that, so that's the first piece. It's like what,
where's this muscle in the architecture of the animal.
And then what does that mean for what's going on in the muscle?
And that's actually more important than fat content. We get really kind of,
we pay a lot of attention to fat content in muscles.
You can make a steak tender if it doesn't have a ton of fat in it,
it actually has more to do if, if there's,
if there's collages and connective tissue in it.
That's fascinating. I never even thought about that. I just,
I thought it kind of, uh, universe, I mean, adds to the,
the texture of the meat, the chewiness of the meat,
but you're saying it's also adds to, uh, how heat, how it reacts to heat,
how the entirety of the meat react heat and the fat is not as important to that
as the, the collagen.
The fat will make the flavor more delicious. Yes. Right?
Like it'll add unctuousness and mouth feel and things like that. But the,
all the connective tissue in meat and in some of the cuts like that,
we ate a skirt steak last night.
You could see a web of that collagen sheath on the outside, on a rib.
That same collagen sheath is this big. There's only one.
It goes around the outside. Okay. Cuz that's just that muscle,
there's one large muscle fiber. So that specific it's a,
it's a Milan sheath, right? That,
that material needs moisture and low and slow heat to become tender.
The other side of that is that when it becomes tender it electrifies and it adds
all this beautiful gelatinous consist. See that's what bone broth is.
That's why a, like a, a slow cooked pork shoulder is so delicious.
It's not that it's full of all that fat. That fat's also great.
But a lot of that mouth feel comes from that really beautiful dissolved
collagen. So when you're looking at like,
how do I understand how I'm gonna cook a piece of meat that first fork in the
road is how is this gonna receive bond to heat mm-hmm <affirmative> and what's
the appropriate cooking technique.
Then the second piece is that surface area to volume ratio.
And that's important because the heat is gonna impact the meat through the
surfaces of the meat that are in contact with the heat.
So if I have a steak, that's three is thick,
I'm gonna cook it extremely diff differently from a,
from a steak that's half inch thick mm-hmm <affirmative> or three quarters of an
inch thick. And that's the major of, and that's the truth.
If I have a piece of pork shoulder,
that's cut into cubes versus having a whole pork shoulder that serves area to
volume ratio, that's gonna totally change how I cook it.
And same things like pot roast and a B stew would be the same cut of meat.
Right. But how I cook them is gonna change based on the surface area of volume.
Cause you've gotta let moisture and heat work its way into the center of the
meat.
And that's gonna be determined by the amount of surface of the meat that's in
contact with whatever cooking, liquid or heat.
You've got.
Is there different sources of heat play with like a big flame versus a,
a small, or maybe even like almost no flame, like over coals,
all that kind of stuff.
Is there some science to the source of heat in how it plays with the meat.
There's indirect heat and direct heat. Yeah.
And that really is mostly about temperature. Okay. In more of than actual,
I mean, smoke is important as well, that can permeate,
but really the smoke doesn't go into the center.
If most cuts that you barbecue it'll come. It's like the smoke ring. It's,
it's a, it's a, you know, it's maximum like half an inch on the outside,
maybe a little bit deeper on a really long slow cook. So they, but the,
the smoke that does create a ton of flavor on the surface of the meat mm-hmm
<affirmative>. Um, but that,
so the indirect allows you to have smoke contacting it and then a very,
very low and slow heat.
And what that does is indirect heat will be
low and slow enough that the center of the meat will get warm at the same time
as the exterior of the meat.
And it'll all cook equally and all get equally tender.
If you go very hot and fast,
you risk the interior of the meat not getting right.
You kind of create a shell on the, on it. Um,
and you slow down the interior of the meat,
which you actually want to do with something like a steak where you wanna keep
it rare on the inside. So it's really indirect versus direct.
Then once you get into direct heat, right? Like in that category, there's wood,
charcoal, gas, right? That's about it.
And those are meaningfully different.
They're meaningfully different charcoal wood. That's more of,
there's more poetry and wood. There's a little bit more flavor,
not functionally, very different,
but gas versus charcoal wood is very different. Mm-hmm <affirmative> um,
and that's because of the actual scent of the, of the cook, right?
The scent of the flavor. Um, and then there's a,
I think an evenness of heat distribution that comes off of charcoal.
That's different from gas because no matter how awesome your gas grill is,
you do have hotter and cooler spots.
Mm-hmm <affirmative> so gas grills are typically,
you can kind of control for that. If you just are going really hot and fast.
Yeah. Which is why gas grills are fine.
If you're just like throwing that steak on getting a hard sea on those burgers,
put crus on it, gas fabulous than that. Mm-hmm <affirmative>, it's perfect.
When you're doing things that do better with a low and slow cook, um,
like let's say a whole Tenderloin or chicken thigh.
That's gonna be a little bit less elegant on gas than on charcoal versus wood
mm-hmm <affirmative>. So when you have more,
more kind of nuance in the low slow cook over the natural fuels.